This lecture's going to be about literate
statistical programming.
In the lecture about reproducible
research, I talked about the basic
ideas of what it means for an analysis to
be reproducible.
But now I'm going to talk about one of the
tools that you can use to actually make
your analysis reproducible by others, or
at least
help other peoples to kind of reproduce
your analysis.
And one of the ways that we talked about
making reproducible documents was to put
this literate statistical
programming, literate statistical
programming
concept, or just literate programming.
And so the basic idea is that, you know,
authors have to
undertake a lot of effort to put data and
results on the web.
And even when they put that stuff on the
web, they, they're all kind of separate.
The data's over here, the code is over
here, and you kind of
have to figure out well, which code goes
with whi, which data
and how do you, wha, how do you escape
this code and
do you load this first, do you do this
first, and so,
there can be a lot of confusion even when
everything is just available.
And, and so.
One of the ways you can simply that
process is to
put the data, and the code together in the
same document
so to speak so that people can execute the
code in
the right order, and the data are read at
the right times.
So you can have a single document that
integrates the data analysis with all
the textural representations so the words
that you use to describe was going on.
And so you don't have that everything kind
of separate pieces but everything's kind
of linked together.
So, the, the, the original idea of how
literate program comes from Don Knuth.
He was a computer scientist at Stanford
and
his original system was for writing just
regular
computer programs and, and documenting the
computer code
at the same time as writing the code.
So the basic idea translates over to a
literate statistical
program where you want to document your
analysis and similarly
have the code for your analysis in the
same document.
And so the ideas and article's a string of
text and
code and analysis code is divided into
text and code chunks.
And so the presentation code formats the
tables, formats figures, things like that.
There's article text that talks about
what's going on.
And then these literate programs, there's
two concepts, you can weave
them into readable, human readable
documents, and you can tangle them to
produce machine readable documents or just
code files.
So, literate programming, as I said
before, is a general concept.
You need a documentation language and a
programming language.
So the original Sweave system that I
talked about before, written by Fritz
Leisch, used LaTeX as the documentation
language and R as the programming
language.
So on this lecture I'm going to talk
about knitr, which supports a variety of
documentation and
programming languages.
And so the first thing you want to start
with, so
the basic question is, how do I make my
work reproducible?
And the basic answer to that is that you
have to decide to do it, okay.
And you can decide to do this at any point
in your, in
your analysis, but it's usually easiest to
do it at the very beginning.
If you decide at the very end that you
want to make your
analysis reproducible, then it often is
much
harder to do and maybe even impossible.
And, and so we want to keep track of
things as you go along.
You can use a version control system like
Get of SVN.
I won't talk about that here but if you've
heard about that that is a good thing to
learn.
It's important to use software,
statistical
software, whose operation can be coded.
So the idea is that you can write down the
instructions that were used to manipulate
or analyze the data.
So this generally rules
out graphical user interfaces unless those
programs will code or keep track
of all the clicks that you make on the
graphical user interface.
Systems like R and other types of
packages, because you have to program them
explicitly.
The code, as long as you save the code,
will be, will kind of,
will have everything that you, will store
everything that you did to the data.
Another key lesson is to not save any
output.
And by output,
I mean mostly kind of temporary data
transformation types of [UNKNOWN].
So if you pre-process the data, and have a
kind of clean data set.
Rather than store the clean data set, it
might be better just
to have the kind of raw data set with the
preprocessing code.
because then you, you not only do you
have, can you
make the final product, but you can see
how you got there.
If you just keep the clean data set, and,
and then you accidentally
lose the preprocessing code, then you
don't really have a good record of
how you got from A to B.
And so try to keep, rather than keeping
the temporary products or even final
products, try to keep the original
products and the code that got you there.
And that will make it easier to understand
what you did
and how you got to the data that you ended
up analyzing.
So not saving up is I think a key element
of reproducibility.
And try not to save data in
non-proprietary formats.
These are data formats that are not where
the, where the lay
out of the data set is not publicly known.
There are not too many proprietary formats
out there any
more that I think are commonly used like
they were before.
But a lot of them, for example, products
will
store data and because it's just much more
efficient.
In a proprietary format, but then that
makes it difficult to transfer
to another person if that person doesn't
have the same exact program.
Then they won't be able to read the data.
And so using non-proprietary,
even textual formats may be compressed can
be much better at, at making,
much much, can make your re, research a
little bit, or analysis more reproducible.
than, proprietary formats.
So there are a couple of pros and cons
when
it comes to the literate programming
style, this is not
the only talk you can use to make your
work
reproducible, but literate programming is
just one of the tools.
And so, some of the pros of that; it
forces
you to put all the text and the code of
your
analysis in one place, so it occurs in a
logical order.
All the data and the results are
automatically updated to
reflect external changes, so if you, kind
of, so you have
this live document, and you make some
changes, when you reprocess
the document, it will automatically update
itself to reflect any changes.
So you don't have, you don't have a
situation where
numbers will be out of date or things will
be mismatch,
mismatched.
Because the code will kind of
automatically recalculate everything.
Because the code is live in the document,
a necessity you
have to run the code in order to produce
the final document.
That's the weeding process.
You get this kind of regression test so to
speak, not like linear regression, but
regression test to see so if there are
any mistakes that you introduced into the
analysis.
If the code doesn't run then you know
you've made, you've
made an error, you've introduced a problem
so the, so the running
of the live code will kind of keep
you from introducing new errors into the
analysis.
Some of the cons when it comes to literate
programming
are that of course the text and the code
are
all in one place so in particular if you
have
a lot of code or a very complex lengthy
analysis.
Then you're like a human readable text is
going to be mixed in with all this
code and it can make it difficult to
edit the document because you have to
somehow search
through all the, this whole document to
figure
out where the text is amongst all the
code.
So that can be a problem for the author.
Also, if your analysis is very complicated
and you have to re-process
this document every time you see a human
readable version of it.
It can, it can a bit substantially slow
down the process by which you build the
document.